INTRODUCTION 

1. By Old English we mean the language of the 
Germanic inhabitants of England, from their earliest 
settlement in that country till about the middle or end 
of the eleventh century. From this time on the lan- 
guage, which differs from that of the older period by 
the gradual decay of inflectional forms, and the intro- 
duction of French elements, is called Middle English, 
and still later Modern English, or simply English. 

Note 1. The OE. writers uniformly call their own language 
Englisc ; the Latin authors employ, for the most part, the term 
Lingua Saxonica. The expressions Ongulseaxan, Lat. AnglosaxoneSj 
etc., were originally employed only in a political sense. The argu- 
ment in favor of employing the term 'Anglo-Saxon' is merely that 
it has been accepted in usage as applying to the oldest period of Eng- 
lish, while ' Old English ' has been applied to what is more correctly 
designated as Middle English. However, this consideration is over- 
borne by the facts that the use of 'Anglo-Saxon,' as an English term 
applying to the language, dates from only 1783 (cf. New Eng. Diet, 
s. V.) ; that our early ancestors did not employ it in this sense ; that 
' Old English ' is in conformity with the terminology applied to conti- 
nental tongues (see above, pp. ix, x) ; and that ' Old English ' is used 
by an ever increasing number of English philologists, having, among 
other authorities, the support of the New English Dictionary. As a 
concession to usage, the original of the present work employs ' Anglo- 
Saxon. ' 

Note 2. Only an approximate date can be assigned to the close of 
the Old English period. Old English manuscripts were still copied 

1 



2 OLD ENGLISH GKAMMAK, 

in the twelfth century, and hence the language was still employed for 
scholarly and literary purposes. On the other hand, we may infer, 
from certain indications, that the popular tongue had before 1050 lost 
many of the phonetic and inflectional peculiarities which distinguish 
Old English from the later stages of the language ; for example, the 
distinction between dative and accusative. 

Old English forms a branch of the so-called West 
Germanic, i.e.^ of the unitary language from which, 
in later times, proceeded Old English, Frisian, Old 
Saxon, Prankish, and Upper German. It is most nearly 
related to Frisian, but next to Old Saxon. Compare 
the editor's Phonological Investigation of Old English, 
Boston, 1888. 

2. In the earliest OE. manuscripts the existence of 
various dialects is plainly discernible. The chief of 
these are the Northumbrian, in the north ; the Midland 
or Mercian, in the interior ; the Saxon, in the south ; 
and the Kentish, in the extreme southeast. 

Northumbrian and Mercian together form the Anglian 
group. The type of Saxon is most clearly exhibited in 
Wessex, the most westerly Saxon district, and thus West 
Saxon has come to be regarded as the chief representar 
tive of the Saxon dialects. The language of the third 
invading tribe, the Jutes, is represented in literature by 
Kentish. Hence the tribal divisions into Angles, Saxons, 
and Jutes have a grammatical parallel in the threefold 
division into Anglian, Saxon, and Kentish. 

Note 1. The pre-Alfredian texts, which are exceedingly impor- 
tant in a linguistic point of view, have been issued in a complete 
edition by Sweet, Oldest English Texts, London, 1885, The OE. 
charters were collected by J. M. Kemble, Codex Diplomaticus ^vi 
Saxonici, London, 1830-48 (new edition by W. de Gray Birch, Cartu- 
larium Saxonicum, London, 1883 ff.) ; the oldest ones are also printed 



INTEODUCTION 3 

in Sweet. An extended bibliography is given in R. Wlil(c)ker's Giund- 
riss zur Geschiclite der Ags. Litteratur, Leipzig, 1885. 

Note 2. Tlie principal Northumbrian texts, besides a few Runic 
inscriptions (Stephens, The Old Northern Runic Monuments 1. 405 ff. ; 
Sweet, Oldest English Texts, 124 ff. ; W. Victor, Die Northumbrischen 
Runensteine, Marburg, 1895), are an interlinear translation of the 
Gospels, the so-called Durham Book, or Lindisfarne Gospels (best 
edition by Skeat : The Gospel according to Saint Matthew, etc. , in 
Anglo-Saxon and Northumbrian Versions, Cambridge, 187 1-87) ; and a 
similar translation of the Durham Ritual, edited by Stevenson for the 
Surtees Society, under the title of Rituale Ecclesise Dunelmensis, 
London, 1840 (a collation by Skeat, Transactions of the Philological 
Society 1877-79, London, 1879, App. L 49 ff.). 

Note 3. Mercian is supposed to be represented by the modified 
transcript of the Northumbrian gloss on Matthew (R.^) in the so- 
called Rushworth MS. , but the dialect seems to be a mixed one, and 
to contain isolated Saxon forms ; as respects the other three Gospels, 
the dialect of the gloss (R.^) is nmch closer to that of the Durham 
Book. The whole is printed in Skeat' s edition. The very important 
interlinear version of the Psalter (in MS. Cotton Vespasian A. 1), 
which was for some time considered to be Kentish, must certainly be 
regarded as Mercian in its linguistic character. It was edited by 
J. Stevenson, Anglo-Saxon and Early English Psalter, for the Surtees 
Society, London, 1843-47, and more correctly in Sweet's Oldest Eng- 
lish Texts, pp. 183 ff. The translation of Bede's Ecclesiastical History 
was originally North Anglian, or perhaps Mercian, but the existing 
transcript is essentially West Saxon (new editions by Thomas Miller, 
The Old English Version of Bede's Ecclesiastical History of the Eng- 
lish People, London, 1890 ff.; Schipper, in the Grein-Wtil(c)ker 
Bibliothek der Ags. Prosa, Leipzig, 1897-1900). Minor specimens of 
Mercian have been edited by A. S. Napier, Angha 10. 131 ff. (a life 
of St. Chad), and by J. Zupitza, Haupt's Zs. 33. 47 (glosses). 

Note 4. The only remains which are certainlv ^ Kentish , in addi- 
tion to a few early charters (printed in Sweet, Oldest English Texts), 
are a metrical translation of the 50th Psalm, a hymn, and a collection 
of glosses in MS. Vesp. D. 6 of the British Museum. The first two 
were .published in Anglosaxonica quae primus edidit Fr. Dietrich, 
Marburg, 1855, and less correctly by Grein, Bibliothek der Ags. Poesie ^ 
2. 276 ff., 290 ff. (cf. Haupt's Zs. 15. 465 ff.); the glosses by J. Zupitza ^ 
in Haupt 21. 1 ff., 22. 223 ff., and in W.right-Wul(c)ker, Anglo-Saxon 



4 OLD ENGLISH GRAMMAR 

and Old English Vocabularies 1. 55 ff. Not pure Kentish, but Kentish 
containing at least an admixture of Mercian forms, is the Epinal Glossary 
of the beginning of the eighth century, together with the nearly related 
Corpus and Erfurt Glossaries, which are tlie chief sources of our 
knowledge of the oldest English. The Epinal Glossary was edited by 
Henry Sweet, London, 1884, with a photolithographic facsimile of the 
whole manuscript ; all three glossaries are in Sweet's Oldest English 
Texts 1 ff., and the Corpus Glossary in Wright- Wul(c)ker 1. 1 ff. 

Alfred's translation of Boethius exists for the most part only in 
two MSS., the Bodleian and the Cottonian, which contain Kentish 
forms, while a fragment from another Bodleian MS. is in pure West 
Saxon ; the Metres are even more distinctly Kentish (see Sedgefield's 
edition, pp. xxxv, xxxvi). All are edited by Sedgefield, King Alfred's 
Old English Version of Boethius De Consolatione Philosophiae, 
Oxford, 1899. 

Note 5. Among the ancient specimens of West Saxon are certain 
works by Alfred the Great, preserved in contemporary manuscripts. 
These are the translation of Gregory the Great's Pastoral Care (edited 
by H. Sweet, King Alfred's West Saxon Version of Gregory's Pastoral 
Care, London, 1871), and of the Chronicle of Orosius, edited from 
the Lauderdale MS. by Sweet, King Alfred's Orosius, London, 1883. 
Next is the oldest text (Parker MS.) of the Saxon Chronicle, of which 
the oldest portion extends to a.d. 891 ; principal editions by B. Thorpe, 
The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, London, 1861, and by Earle, Two of 
the Saxon Chronicles, Oxford, 1865, revised and much improved by 
C. Plummer, Oxford, 1892, 1899. Chief sources for LWS. are especially 
the numerous and still partly unpublished works of ^Ifric {circa 1000). 
His sermons are peculiarly important, on account of their preservation 
of dialectical peculiarities (edited by B. Thorpe, The Homilies of 
^Ifric, London, 1844-46, for the iElfric Society); vElfric's OE. Gram- 
mar of Latin was edited -by J. Zupitza, Berlin, 1880. 

By Pure West Saxon is meant so much of the language of Alfred 
and iElfric as is common to both, excluding the idiosyncrasies of the 
individual scribes. 

Note 6. The poetical texts of Old English were collected by 
C. W. M. Grein, Bibliothek der Ags. Poesie, Cassel und Gottingen, 
1857-^4 (newly edited by R. P. Wul(c)ker, Cassel, 1881-98). . They 
originated for the most part in the Anglian territory (compare Beitr. 
10. 464 ff.), but are nearly all preserved in copies made by Southern 
scribes. The MSS. belong chiefly to the tenth and eleventh centuries, 



INTEODUCTION 5 

and therefore represent no dialect in its purity, but consist of a medley 
of the most various forms. Not only have Anglian forms frequently 
been transferred from the originals, but earlier and later forms of the 
same dialect alternate with each other. The poems, therefore, can 
only be employed with the utmost caution for grammatical purposes. 
Now and then, indeed, the metre does allow an approximate determi- 
nation of the original forms to be made (Beitr. 10. 209 ff., 451 ff.). 

3. The chief characteristics o f .WS. are the represen- 
tation of Germ, se hy se (57; 150. 1); the accurate dis- 
crimination of ea and eo (150. 3); the early loss of the 
sound oe (27); and the displacement of the ending -u, 
-o, of the ind. pres. 1 sing., by -e (355). 

In EWS. the umlaut of ea, eo is ie, passing later 
into i, y (41 ; 150. 2). Northumbrian has a tendency 
to drop final n (188. 2), and to convert we into woe, and 
weo into wo (156). The inflections were unsettled at 
an early period ; especially noticeable is the frequent 
formation of the ind. pres. 3 sing, and of the whole 
plur., in -s instead of -3" (357). The oldest criterion of 
Kentish is the vocalization of g- to i (214. 2) ; more 
recent was the substitution of e for y (154). 

ALPHABET AND PRONUNCIATION 

4. The OE. alphabet is the Latin alphabet as modi- 
fied by English scribes. The letters f, g-, r, and s are 
most unlike the usual forms. Besides the Latin letters, 
there were 9", ]?, and a character for w, the two latter 
being borrowed from the Runic alphabet (note 3). 

English editions of OE. texts have often been printed 
with type made in imitation of the manuscript characters. 
At present, however, the Roman letters are universally 



6 OLD ENGLISH GRAMMAR 

preferred, with the addition of the characters tf and p. 
Occasionally, too, the OE. 5 is employed to represent g. 

Note 1. The characters 3 and g are not discriminated as indicating 
respectively spirant and sonant stops (211 ff.) until we reach the MSS. 
of the close of the OE. period, or later. The OE. manuscripts them- 
selves have only the form 3, and the Latin manuscripts of the period, 
written in England, likewise employ it to represent Latin g, of which 
it is only a modified form ; hence we can form no conclusion from 
the mere character regarding its pronunciation at this time. The 3 is 
employed by some authorities (and so also in the original of the pres- 
ent work) in order not to create the impression that it was introduced 
later to denote the spirant, whereas in fact it was the g which was 
added to distinguish the sonant stop. 

Note 2. Abbreviations are not very common in Old English manu- 
scripts. They are usually denoted by ~ or ~. ~ over vowels signifies 
m, for example fro = frpin ; over consonants er, as in aeft, faestn, 
of = aefter, faestern, ofer. On the other hand, ~ denotes or, as in 
f, fe, befan, etc. = for, fore, beforau ; but ?Jofi, hwofi stand for 
tJonne, hwonne. A ]? with crossed vertical signifies paet. The fol- 
lowing were borrowed from Latin : "1 for 9nd, and, and ; and an 1 
crossed with an undulatory stroke for oSSe, or. Less common are 
actual Latin words, such as dns (= dominus), or rex for OE. 
dryhten, cyning. 

Note 3. Before the introduction of the Latin alphabet, the Eng- 
lish already possessed Runic letters. This alphabet is an extension of 
the old German Runic alphabet of twenty-four letters (L.F. A. Wimmer, 
Die Runenschrift, tr. by F. Holthausen, Berlin, 1887). The few Runic 
remains may be found in G. Stephens, The Old Northern Runic Monu- 
ments, Copenhagen, 1866, 1. 361 ff., and in Sweet, Oldest English Texts, 
pp. 124-130 (cf. also 2, note 2). The most important of these are the 
inscriptions on the Ruthwell Cross in Northumberland (also in Zupitza- 
MacLean, Old and Middle English Reader ; Grein-Wul(c)ker 2. 111- 
115 ; best in Vietor, Die Altnorthumbrischen Runensteine, pp. 2 ff. ; 
compare Cook, 'Notes on the Ruthwell Cross,' in Pub. Mod. Lang. 
Assoc. 17. 367-390), Bewcastle Cross in Cumberland (Stephens 1. 398 ; 
Vietor, pp. 13 ff.), and the Clermont or Franks casket (Stephens 1. 470 
ff. ; E. Wadstein, Ett Engelskt Fornmlnne fram 700-Talet och Eng- 
lands Ditida Kultur, Goteborg, 1901 ; and especially A. S. Napier, ' The 
Franks Casket,' in An English Miscellany, Oxford, 1901, pp. 362-381). 



INTRODUCTION 7 

5. The data for determining the pronunciation of 
these letters is furnished by the traditional pronuncia- 
tion of Latin as it obtained in England from about the 
seventh century; besides, it is not improbable that 
Celtic (Irish) influences must be taken into account. 
In doubtful cases we are obliged to resort to variation 
in the orthography, and especially to phonetic changes 
and grammatical phenomena in Old English itself, as a 
means of determining the pronunciation. Moreover, 
the latter cannot have been the same at all times and 
in all localities. 

In the following chapters on phonology the more 
precise pronunciation of the individual letters will be 
indicated, whenever it can be done with any approach 
to certainty, especially where this differs from the pro- 
nunciation of the corresponding Latin letters. 



PHONOLOGY 

PART I. — THE VO WELS 

IN GENERAL 

6. The Old English vowels are denoted by the six 
simple characters a, e, i, o, u, y, the ligature ae, and the 
digraphs oe, ea (ia), eo, io, and ie (rarely au, ai, ei, 
oi, ui, and in the oldest texts eu, iu); the latter, with 
the exception of oe, oi, and ui (and occasionally eo, 27, 
note), having the value of diphthongs. 

Note 1. Ancient MSS. often write ae as ae, or even as ^ ; so, too, 
the printed oe is always represented by oe. The distinctions in both 
cases are merely graphical, and have nothing to do with the pronun- 
ciation. For, el, which is mostly restricted to foreign words, the later 
MSS. have also eg(e), as in scegS, Sweg(e)n, for scei3, Swein. The 
occurrence of the diphthong au is very infrequent ; it is found in for- 
eign words like cawl, cole^ laiirtreow, laurel^ clauster, cloister ; and 
perhaps in auht, aught^ nauht, naughty saul, soul^ for and beside 
a(\v)uht, na(w)uht (344 ff.), sa(w)ul (174. 3). The diphthongs ai, 
oi, ui are rare, and especially Northumbrian, graphic variants for 
ae, oe, and y respectively, as in cnalht, fraigna (155. 3), Coinred for 
Coenred, suinnig for synnig, sinful. 

Note 2. Old English has no diphthongs except those already men- 
tioned. Every other vowel combination (including in most cases ei) 
must be analyzed into its two component vowels : aidlian = a-Tdlian, 
aurnen = a-urnen, ay tan = a-ytan, beirnan = be-irnan, gey wed = 
ge-ywed,geunnan=:ge-unnan, etc.; iu is generally ju (74; 157, note). 

7. With respect to the position of the articulating 
organs, a, o, u are guttural vowels, while ae, e, i, oe, y 



THE VOWELS 9 

are palatals (see the author's Phone tik,* pp. 92 ff.). 
The diphthongs uniformly begin with a palatal sound. 

Note. Of the palatal vowels, the following belong to the earliest 
prehistoric stage of Old English : viz., ae = West Germ, a (49) ; ge = 
West Germ, a (57. 2) ; e = West Germ, e (53) ; i; i; and the initial 
components of the diphthongs ea, eo, io. On the other hand, the fol- 
lowing arose in a somewhat later prehistoric period of OE., and are 
due to the palatalization of an originally guttural vowel by i-umlaut : 
viz. , ae as i-umlaut of a (90) ; ^ as i-umlaut of a, 9 before nasals 
(89. 4), and of o (93. 1); e as i-umlaut of o (94); besides oe, oe (27), 
and stable y, y (32 ; 33). These two groups may properly be designated 
by the terms 'primary palatal vowels ' and 'secondary palatal vowels' 
respectively. The following occupy an interrnediate position, in so far 
as they are umlauts, not of guttural vowels, but of the primary palatals : 
viz., ^ as umlaut of ae (89. 1); ie, ie = unstable i, i ; y as umlaut of 
ea, eo, io ; and y as umlaut of ea, eo, 10 (97 ff.). 

